Briefing if you like.
And, and then we'll go. Questions,
Uh, uh, good afternoon and thank you.
Um, I'm joined today by Warren Hughes
and, uh, Jeffrey Fowls, who is our principal advisors,
A CBM and toxicology.
Um, we'll just briefly, um, summarize, um, in a situation
with the glyphosate maximum residue levels.
Um, and then we're ready
to answer any questions that you might have.
Um, and so New Zealand food safety
or MPI establishes MRLs
or maximum residue, uh, levels for, um,
agricultural PRO products, it's a very routine process.
An MRL sets the limit for good agricultural practice,
uh, and is often used as a trade indicator
is not a health indicator.
Um, so the levels are what one would expect to see
or the maximum levels you'd expect to see
when a product is used according to label
and according to good agricultural practice, uh, glyphosate,
the, um, has had a traditionally,
or for some time now, an MRL
that is based on a default level.
In 2015 16, some
of our routine food residue surveys indicated
that we were getting residue levels in excess
of the default level,
and it warranted further, uh, expiration.
We found about 50% of samples exceeded the MRL.
Um, we then, uh, undertook further examination
and what we found was the farmers
and growers were using the product according to label, uh,
and, and, uh, within the normal good agricultural practice
and the, the MRL default, MRL was still being exceeded.
We worked with the Federation of Arable Research to,
to further examine that, we came to the conclusion
that the MRLs needed to be examined.
Um, and we did further work following that.
Earlier this year, we proposed a series of new MRLs, uh,
for arable uh, products.
Uh, we undertook a public consultation.
We had extensive submissions, uh,
from stakeholders and the general public.
We undertook a series of detailed industry engagements.
Uh, after the public consultation, uh,
we got feedback from industry that the practice
and use of glyphosate,
particularly in this arable area, had changed.
And increasingly, um, growers were using less of it, uh,
or none at a pre-harvest level, which gave us confidence
that we could establish an MRL level equivalent
to the current default.
Provided that we changed the labels
and removed the pre-harvest use, that leaves growers able
to use the product, um, between harvests, um, uh,
but a pre-emergence,
but not, uh, not at the point in which they're preparing
for harvest, the exception being dried peas, uh,
where we got strong feedback from the industry
that was general practice and necessary.
It's a small export, export product.
And in that respect, we maintained the MRL proposal, uh,
at the proposed level.
We've publicly now communicated that, uh,
and we're in the process of giving effect to it.
I see the chair's on board now. Good day.
Hello. Uh, thank you, uh, deputy chair
as always, consummate.
Thank you, gentlemen, for joining us.
I'll leave you with it and we'll carry on.
So, uh, Steve's got a question.
Yes, Steve, please. Steve Abel.
And, um, I imagine after that there'll be several questions.
Yeah. Thank you Mr. Chair.
And thank you for the, uh,
explanation from, um, food safety.
So just to clarify, you are going
to adjust the labels on glyphosate products to make
pre-harvest use for oats, wheat,
and barley no longer, um,
permissible or no longer appropriate use
That, that, that currently those, um,
on-label use is permitted under the label.
Um, and you're correct.
We will now move, we have to do, we have
to do what's called a reassessment.
It's a process we undertake with industry,
but our intention, and we are confident
we'll be able to do that.
We will remove the permission on label to use it
for free harvest.
We believe we've got good industry support for doing that.
That will sort of set a chalk behind industry practice and
therefore, uh, that no longer permitted to be used,
the exception being dried peas.
If I, if I, if I could ask the clarification on that,
just on the back of Steve Abel's questions,
and maybe you can enlighten me further.
So we are talking about pre-emergence spray, um, reality,
and the, the labeling for that,
or that intended use would re be removed
and the farmers would have the, the, you might say,
the free board to, to operate with one's discretion.
Is that what I understand it to be?
Yeah. What, what, what will the situation
after we do the process around the label will be,
can be explicitly used for pre-emergence.
Mm-hmm. Remember when we are talking about
for human consumption only? Yes.
So If it goes to animal feed, this just does not apply
and can be used for, used
for animal feed in a pre-harvest sense.
Mm. Um, so there'll be still permission to use it, um,
pre-emergence, but no longer used for pre-harvest.
Very good. Um, and just as a, it's just a supplement to
that, have we had any, uh, testing on residual numbers?
Um, I use this stuff all the time
and yeah, I, I was off the volition, uh,
that it breaks down very, very quickly.
Uh, obviously the plants pick it up from a soil composition
point of view, uh,
and noting with, you know,
that there are multiple soil types, are we getting residual,
um, of CO2, uh, sorry, glyphosate in the
soil structure, yes or no?
Uh, we haven't ourselves actively researched the soil
implications, but generally international science suggests
that it's a, a product that's not accumulating soils
or the environment breaks down quickly.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and, and,
and there's not a, that's not accu
that's not accumulating in the soils or environment.
Brilliant. Thank you so much for that.
Uh, questions members,
I've got another, if there's time Mr. G.
Yes. Yes. On by all means.
Um, can you clarify a couple of things?
One is what the period of time was
during which there wasn't testing
of glyphosate residues on wheat barley know its,
am I correct to understand that, um,
after those higher res, uh, residues were found,
there was a significant period when there wasn't
any testing done?
Um, the, I need to differentiate between testing that,
uh, MPI might do.
And, um, there's a raft of testing that will be done by,
by industry or by retailers.
Um, we will periodically test a range of products.
There's, and there's literally, uh, thousands of products,
um, you know, that applied to, uh, crops and animals.
We run a regular cycle of, uh, of residue testing
and we choose different products
and different, different food products
and different chemicals to test on a, on a cycle.
So we have not, uh, tested glyphosate
and an arable products since the 2016 tests.
Yeah. Mostly because we don't believe we'll see a difference
from what we, you know, what we saw then.
Have any further questions, Steve?
Yeah. So we have, we have a data,
a technical data gap based on you guys assessing
that there wasn't gonna be anything new to discover.
Um, but in fact, what's been dis found out
through the submission process on the proposal
to increase the glyphosate residue by a hundred fold is
that industries moved further away from it
and are keen to, um, maintain that status of
avoiding it as much as possible
for the production of those food crops.
Is that a fair assessment of what's gone on in that time?
Uh, uh, a very, very fair assessment.
I mean, I think the Indus industry, you know, the, the,
the Millers, um, have realized that there is,
there is strong public views on this.
Uh, and for a small domestic industry, uh, they're able to,
the growers are able to accommodate this not non-use at,
uh, pre-harvest.
So as a result, we are able to maintain
or set an MRL equivalent to the default,
provided the label changes.
That's great. I've got one final
one, if that's right, Mr. Chair.
Yeah. By all means. Yeah.
Um, now you had over 3000 submissions,
and is it correct that none
of the submissions spoke in support of the proposal
to increase the residue limit?
Uh, that I have not read my personally gone
through all the submissions.
There is a publicly available sub, uh, summary
of those submissions, uh,
and it provides account against each of the areas of focus.
So, so that surely that, um, summary
elucidates my question,
whether there are any submissions in support
of increasing the residue limits,
The, the summary is available, it provides, uh, the themes
of the feedback from the sub, from the consultation
and provides a numerical count
or rough count against each of the themes.
Right. But, so, okay. Yep.
Do, do these limits apply to imported
grains because most of our grains imported,
Um, Or food anyway,
Not the same limits. So,
um, so New Zealand, uh, uh, approves either
imports that meet the New Zealand standards
or the Codex standards.
So there is possible
that products could come into New Zealand with higher, uh,
Under the codec standards.
Yeah. 'cause it result of the codec standard. Correct.
Thank you on that. No.
No. Okay. So, uh, forgive me gentlemen,
I'm not quite sure when we started,
but we had you for 15 minutes.
Um, I'm not quite sure, miles, are we due to tie off now?
Well, um, I I guess the, uh,
officials could just run over their final decision.
That's Yes. Brilliant. In the document.
We're finished and we're
happy to answer any more questions.
Alright. Right. So, 'cause the final decision is there's
not gonna be a change until the labels are changed. That,
That, that's correct. So we And
How long does, do you think that would? Um,
We'd probably, we, we believe we'll have that done,
um, early next year. Okay.
Yes. I just clarify that.
But there, there won't be an even
after the label's gonna change to clarify
that there won't be pre-harvest use
for wheat o both bley and oats.
But the, also the residue limit is now not gonna go up
for those three crops.
That's correct. The current default level will remain, uh,
Which is 0.01, is that correct?
Uh, 0.1.
Um, and 0.1 for barley, barley, oats, and wheat.
And it'll move to six for dried peas.
Yeah. Very good.
Very good. Gentlemen, thank you so much for your time.
Um, we're always grateful
to have NPI officials in our company.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Are we moving outta public now?
Um, yes. Yeah, we, because
Just gonna say I'd like short point water, so.